simple recipe for a DataFrame (#269)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/data_vis_makie_recipe.md

## A Makie recipe for a DataFrame {#sec:recipe_df}

Unlike other libraries that already support a wide set of input formats via recipes, i.e. `Plots.jl`, in `Makie.jl` most of the time we need to pass the raw data to functions.
However, we can also define our own  `recipe` in  `Makie.jl`.

> A `recipe` is your own custom plotting type command.

Reviewer: I still don't think this is clear.
For instance, a new user (the profile of our reader) would be confused.

Does a recipe create a `plot` and `plot!` custom function for my custom types?
Like call i simply call:

```julia
plot(my_custom_type)
```

and it will plot?

It is not clear.
Down below you create a recipe for a `DfPlot`:

```julia
@recipe(DfPlot, df) do scene
...
```

But somehow you have to call it with `dfplot` (all lowercase).
Our reader would be asking themselves "WTF, how does that work? Do I have to use `plot[!]`, or `dfplot`? And how did it got converted to a lowercase plotting function?"

Author: agree. Now it saids that the macro `@recipe` is responsible for creating two new lowercase functions that you are suppose to use later on.

This extension is done just in `Makie.jl`, which means that making a new set of plotting rules for your own types is light, namely, you don't need the complete plotting machinery available to define them. This is specially useful if you want to include your own plotting commands in one of your own packages.

> However, in order for them to work you will still need to use one of the backends, i.e., GLMakie.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in order for them to work you will still need to use one of the backends, i.e., GLMakie or CairoMakie.
```

## A Makie recipe for a DataFrame {#sec:recipe_df}

> Unlike other libraries that already support a wide set of input formats via recipes, i.e. `Plots.jl`, in `Makie.jl` most of the time we need to pass the raw data to our functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike other libraries that already support a wide set of input formats via recipes, i.e. `Plots.jl`, in `Makie.jl` most of the time we need to pass the raw data to functions.
```

> However, if we want to define our own `recipe` in Makie we could also do it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, we can also define our own  `recipe` in  `Makie.jl`.
```

> As an example we will code a small **full recipe** for a `DataFrame`. Please refer to the [documentation](https://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/documentation/recipes/) for more details.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate a bit more on what a recipe is? To be honest, I'm also not sure whether I fully understand it. As far as I understand, recipes are meant for lightweight interface packages so that you can define plotting in your package without having to load the full plotting library? Also, it allows defining a basic framework?

Reviewer: Yeah I agree with @rikhuijzer, recipes need at least a simple definition.

Author: I also agree on this 😄 ... I will come back shortly.

Author: An extra paragraph is up.

> A Makie `recipe` consist of two parts, a plot `type` name defined via `@recipe` and a custom `plot!`(`Makie.plot!`) which creates the actual plot via plotting functions already defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Makie `recipe` consist of two parts, a plot `type` name defined via `@recipe` and a custom `plot!(::Makie.plot)` which creates the actual plot via plotting functions already defined.
```

```jl
s = """
    @recipe(DfPlot, df) do scene
        Attributes(
            x = :A,
            y = :B,
            c = :C,
            color = :red,
            colormap = :plasma,
            markersize = 20,
            marker = :rect
        )
    end
    """
sc(s)
```

> with this we will have `dfplot` and `dfplot!` conveniently defined for us.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with this we will have `dfplot` and `dfplot!` conveniently defined for us.
With this, we can conveniently plot `DataFrame`s which contains columns named, `x`, `y`, `z`.
```

Reviewer: "With this" is duplicated as starting point for two times in a row on your suggestion @rikhuijzer.

Reviewer 2: Fixed

> Now, let's take care of our plot definition. We will do a simple scatter plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's take care of our plot definition.
We will do a simple scatter plot:
```

```
import Makie
```

```jl
s = """
    function Makie.plot!(p::DfPlot{<:Tuple{<:DataFrame}})
        df = p[:df][]
        x = getproperty(df, p[:x][])
        y = getproperty(df, p[:y][])
        c = getproperty(df, p[:c][])
        scatter!(p, x, y; color = c, markersize = p[:markersize][],
            colormap = p[:colormap][], marker = p[:marker][])
        return p
    end
    """
sc(s)
```

> Note the extras `[]` at the end of each variable. Those are due to the fact that *recipes* in Makie are dynamic, meaning that our plots will update if our variables change. See [observables](https://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/documentation/nodes/) to know more.

Reviewer 2: Ah, is it because the DfPlot is immutable and they use pointers to (de)reference stuff? Sounds a bit dangerous but okay

Author: is the whole logic of observables in Makie 😄

> Note the extras `[]` at the end of each variable. Those are due to the fact that *recipes* in Makie are dynamic, meaning that our plots will update if our variables change. See [observables](https://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/documentation/nodes/) to know more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the extras `[]` at the end of each variable.
Those are due to the fact that *recipes* in Makie are dynamic, meaning that our plots will update if our variables change.
See [observables](https://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/documentation/nodes/) to know more.
```

Just a better semantic break here.

Now, we apply our new plotting function to the following `DataFrame`:

```jl
s = """
    df_recipe = DataFrame(A=randn(10), B=randn(10), C=rand(10))
    """
sc(s)
```

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    dfplot(df_recipe)
    label = "dfRecipe" # hide
    caption = "DataFrames recipe." # hide
    link_attributes = "width=60%" # hide
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label, link_attributes) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

> The named attributes in the recipe allows us to pass custom names to our new plotting function. Namely,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The named attributes in the recipe allows us to pass custom names to our new plotting function. Namely:
```

```jl
s = """
    df_names = DataFrame(a1=rand(100), a2=rand(100), a3=rand(100))
    """
sc(s)
```

> and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and:
```

sc(s)
```

> note that here the macro `@recipe` will automatically create for us two new functions, `dfplot` and `dfplot!`, all lowercase from our type `DfPlot`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the macro `@recipe` will automatically create two new functions for us, `dfplot` and `dfplot!`, all lowercase from our type `DfPlot`.
```

Author: great! thanks a lot @rikhuijzer
